# data-binge-drinking-2015

This dataset was collected by Maeve Hanvey for her undergraduate dissertation project (2015-16), supervised by Dr Ben Vincent at the University of Dundee.

This is essentially a correlational study, designed to explore the relationship between alcohol consumption habits and delay discounting (aka temporal discounting). We have `N = 35` participants (before any exclusion), and for each, we have a set of measures relating to alcohol consumption, and a set of measures relating to delay discounting behaviour.

## Files
The main data is presented in 2 tab-delimited `.csv` files.
- `binge-discounting.csv` contains participant information and binge-drinking measures.
- `discounting_analysis/parameterEstimates_Posterior_mode.csv` contains delay discounting measures, this file is automatically generated by computerised scoring of the delay discounting toolbox (see Vincent, 2016).

In order to proceed with any analysis, you will need to combine data from both of these files, checking that the participants (rows) match up correctly, and being wise to the fact that some participants may have been excluded from the discounting parameter estimate file.

Other files:
- `discounting_raw_data/` is a folder containing raw response data for the delay discounting task, for each participant.
- `score_discounting_responses.m` is a Matlab script used to score the raw delay discounting data, resulting in the measures `m` and `c`, see below.

## Variables in `binge-discounting.csv`

- `ID`
- `sex`
- `age`

The following variables are obtained from the Alcohol Timeline Followback Questionnaire (Sobell & Sobell, 1992, 1995).
- `drinking_days`
- `binge_days`
- `total_units`
- `mean_units_per_session` is a derived quantity, equal to `total_units / drinking_days`

The following variable was constructed from a modified version of the Alcohol Urge Questionnaire (Bohn et al, 1995).
- `binge score`

## Variables in `parameterEstimates_Posterior_mode.csv`
All participants completed a delay discounting task, indicating choices between immediate (hypothetical) monetary rewards vs larger but later rewards. Each trial resulted in a binary choice (for smaller sooner, or larger later reward). The raw data was then scored using the toolbox described by Vincent (2016): we estimated a how a participant's discount rate (according to the hyperbolic discount function) varied as a function of reward magnitude:

    log(k) = m.log(|reward|) + c

This analysis was conducted using `score_discounting_responses.m`. I used a hyperbolic discounting model, which also accounts for the magnitude effect. Because we do not have multiple participant groups or conditions, we subjected all participant data to group-level hierarchical analysis. This scoring procedure resulted in the following temporal discounting measures:

- `m` describes the slope of log discount rate as a function of log reward magnitude. If `m=0` then the size of a monetary reward has no effect upon the discount rate. When `m<0` it means discount rates decrease as rewards get larger. In other words, people get less impulsive when it comes to obtaining larger amounts of money.
- `c` can be seen as a baseline level of discounting.


NOTE 1: The values of `m` and `c` _may_ change in the future. This is an entirely valid thing to do, because they are not raw data, but instead the results of a complex scoring procedure based upon raw response data from the discounting task. That raw response data should not, and will not, change.

NOTE 2: The `m` and `c` variables are labelled under `m_mode` and `c_mode` in `parameterEstimates_Posterior_mode.csv`. I am basing point estimates on the posterior model (rather than median or mean) because the `P(m,c|data)` is a complex joint distribution, posteriors of `m` and `c` are not independent.

## References

Bohn, M. J., Krahn, D. D., & Staehler, B. A. (1995). Development and initial validation of a measure of drinking urges in abstinent alcoholics. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 19(3), 600-606.

Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1992). Timeline follow-back. In Measuring alcohol consumption (pp. 41-72). Humana Press

Sobell, L. C., & Sobell, M. B. (1995). Alcohol timeline followback users’ manual. Toronto, Canada: Addiction Research Foundation.

Vincent, B. T. (2016). Hierarchical Bayesian estimation and hypothesis testing for delay discounting tasks. Behavior Research Methods, 48(4), 1608–1620. http://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-015-0672-2
